bake/README.adoc, before:

= Bake

Go Build + Something like Make = Bake ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ 🤷

== Installation

Run:

----
go install github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/bake@bake
----

Then add this to your bashrc:

----
complete -o default -C bake bake
----

== Example Task

NOTE: A more in depth example can be found https://github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/blob/bake/bake/examples/website/README.adoc[here].

[source, go]
----
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"os"

	"github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions"
	"github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/dag"
)

var Logger = log.New(os.Stderr, "", log.LstdFlags)

var TM *dag.TaskMap

// say:hello - This is a greeting
func Hello(opt *getoptions.GetOpt) getoptions.CommandFn {
	var lang string
	opt.StringVar(&lang, "lang", "en", opt.ValidValues("en", "es"))
	return func(ctx context.Context, opt *getoptions.GetOpt, args []string) error {
		Logger.Println("Running Hello")

		switch lang {
		case "en":
			fmt.Println("Hello")
		case "es":
			fmt.Println("Hola")
		}

		return nil
	}
}
----

Run it:

----
$ bake say hello
2023/04/10 14:58:34 Running Hello
Hello

$ bake say hello --lang=es
2023/04/10 14:58:38 Running Hello
Hola
----

== How does it work?

Bake is a Make like tool that allows you to define and run tasks defined in Go code under a `bake/` dir.

First it searches to see if the current directory is named `bake/`, next it searches for `bake/` inside the current directory and finally it searches for `bake/` in the root of the Git repo.
This allows to run bake from anywhere in the repo.

Once a `bake/` dir is found, it will compile the code as a Go plugin and load it (`go build -buildmode=plugin -o=bake.so`).
The plugin is only recompiled if the source code is changed (using https://github.com/DavidGamba/dgtools/tree/master/fsmodtime[fsmodtime]).

Once the plugin is loaded, the source code is parsed to find function declarations matching the bake Task signature (`func(*getoptions.GetOpt) getoptions.CommandFn`).
Additionally, it tries to load a `dag.TaskMap` global named `TM`.

The functions are loaded as `go-getoptions` commands and subcommands, by parsing the comment description.

For example:

[source,go]
----
// say:hello - This is a greeting
func Hello(opt *getoptions.GetOpt) getoptions.CommandFn {
----

If there is no comment found for the function, the function name will be automatically converted to kebab case.

The above function will be generate two commands, one for `say` and one for `hello`.
The description for the `hello` command will be `This is a greeting`.

If the global task map was found, the task will automatically be added as `say:hello`.
This allows to generate custom task graphs.

Since the plugin tasks are added to the bake command's `go-getoptions` instance, completions are automatically generated.

== Known Issues

Working with plugins has a few downsides.
In particular:

* The version of Go must match between the `bake` binary and the plugin.
Because of that, the recommended install method is using `go install` rather than a package manager.

* The versions of the dependencies must match between the `bake` binary and the plugin.
A helper will be added to alleviate this task.

== ROADMAP

* Add helper to generate go.mod with the same dependencies as the bake binary.

* Automated cancellation on timeout when passing -t flag.

* Allow to compile a static binary with the bundled plugin.

=== Debugging

TODO: This section needs work, waiting on https://github.com/go-delve/delve/issues/1628[delve#1628]

Install with Debug flags:

----
go install -trimpath -gcflags "all=-N -l" github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/bake@bake
----

Commit message:

bake: search for bake/ dir at the root of the go project before trying to go to the root of the repo

bake/README.adoc, after:

= Bake

Go Build + Something like Make = Bake ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ 🤷

== Installation

Run:

----
go install github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/bake@bake
----

Then add this to your bashrc:

----
complete -o default -C bake bake
----

== Example Task

NOTE: A more in depth example can be found https://github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/blob/bake/bake/examples/website/README.adoc[here].

[source, go]
----
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"os"

	"github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions"
	"github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/dag"
)

var Logger = log.New(os.Stderr, "", log.LstdFlags)

var TM *dag.TaskMap

// say:hello - This is a greeting
func Hello(opt *getoptions.GetOpt) getoptions.CommandFn {
	var lang string
	opt.StringVar(&lang, "lang", "en", opt.ValidValues("en", "es"))
	return func(ctx context.Context, opt *getoptions.GetOpt, args []string) error {
		Logger.Println("Running Hello")

		switch lang {
		case "en":
			fmt.Println("Hello")
		case "es":
			fmt.Println("Hola")
		}

		return nil
	}
}
----

Run it:

----
$ bake say hello
2023/04/10 14:58:34 Running Hello
Hello

$ bake say hello --lang=es
2023/04/10 14:58:38 Running Hello
Hola
----

== How does it work?

Bake is a Make like tool that allows you to define and run tasks defined in Go code under a `bake/` dir.

First it searches to see if the current directory is named `bake/`, next it searches for `bake/` inside the current directory, next it searches for `bake/` in the root of the Go project (the `go.mod` file dir) and finally it searches for `bake/` in the root of the Git repo.
This allows to run bake from anywhere in the repo.

Once a `bake/` dir is found, it will compile the code as a Go plugin and load it (`go build -buildmode=plugin -o=bake.so`).
The plugin is only recompiled if the source code is changed (using https://github.com/DavidGamba/dgtools/tree/master/fsmodtime[fsmodtime]).

Once the plugin is loaded, the source code is parsed to find function declarations matching the bake Task signature (`func(*getoptions.GetOpt) getoptions.CommandFn`).
Additionally, it tries to load a `dag.TaskMap` global named `TM`.

The functions are loaded as `go-getoptions` commands and subcommands, by parsing the comment description.

For example:

[source,go]
----
// say:hello - This is a greeting
func Hello(opt *getoptions.GetOpt) getoptions.CommandFn {
----

If there is no comment found for the function, the function name will be automatically converted to kebab case.

The above function will be generate two commands, one for `say` and one for `hello`.
The description for the `hello` command will be `This is a greeting`.

If the global task map was found, the task will automatically be added as `say:hello`.
This allows to generate custom task graphs.

Since the plugin tasks are added to the bake command's `go-getoptions` instance, completions are automatically generated.

== Known Issues

Working with plugins has a few downsides.
In particular:

* The version of Go must match between the `bake` binary and the plugin.
Because of that, the recommended install method is using `go install` rather than a package manager.

* The versions of the dependencies must match between the `bake` binary and the plugin.
A helper will be added to alleviate this task.

== ROADMAP

* Add helper to generate go.mod with the same dependencies as the bake binary.

* Automated cancellation on timeout when passing -t flag.

* Allow to compile a static binary with the bundled plugin.

=== Debugging

TODO: This section needs work, waiting on https://github.com/go-delve/delve/issues/1628[delve#1628]

Install with Debug flags:

----
go install -trimpath -gcflags "all=-N -l" github.com/DavidGamba/go-getoptions/bake@bake
----
